---
tags  : [TA, Ling 115]
category: [TA, Ling 115]
---
## Week 1
- Andrew already goes over the syllabus = maybe we should not go over it during the sections?
- PowerPoints = be prepared to take notes during the class. The pop-quiz will be graded based on the information during the lecture, and pop-quizzes will be in person
  - 6 correct answers for the pop quiz, then you will pass
- The lecture will be recorded
- no attendance
- participation in linguistics experiments

The Invariant System Hypothesis
• A language consists in:
• (a) a set of words ( a vocabulary)
• (b) a set of rules of grammar and pronunciation

Problem with the Invariant System Hypothesis
- we all have different and idiosyncratic ways of speaking to a certain extent
- We all have different, idiosyncratic ways of speaking to a certain extent.
• We all have our own, special ‘idiolect’ = unique way for individuals use language
If a single, invariant set of rules is taken to define ‘English’ as a language, we would have to conclude that most people in the US and UK are NOT speakers of ‘English’, as they use their own individualized systems – their idiolects.

The Mutual Intelligibility Hypothesis/MIH = understanding rather than linguistic differences 
- An approach based on mutual understanding (or lack of it).

Problem with the Mutual Intelligibility Hypothesis/MIH
- Counter-examples
- Type 1: 2+ varieties of speech are mutually intelligible, but are classified as different languages = two or more tend to be mutually intelligible but are classified as two different languages
  - Scandinavia: Danish, Swedish, and Norwegian = multilingual intelligible
- Type 2: 2+ varieties are mutually unintelligible, but are classified as varieties (dialects) of the same language.
- Chinese: Mandarin, Cantonese, Taiwanese, Shanghainese… = should be different languages, but classified as dialects of the same language
- A similar case: Arabic: regional form of Arabic = mutually intelligible
- Conclusion: the MIH cannot account for real-world language-dialect divisions = and can not distinguish language from dialects
- linguistics use this hypothesis
  - mismatch between linguistics and government

If varieties of speech are often not classified as ‘languages’ due to their linguistic properties, what factors do cause some varieties to be called ‘languages’ and others ‘dialects’?
• Answer: Quite often, socio-political factors are responsible for the language/dialect division. Political events and situations in society lead to the formal recognition of certain varieties as languages and others as dialects.
- politics drives the differences, not the linguistic differences 

  
